>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 1:
IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE
BEHEADING OF A JAPANESE HOSTAGE,
JORDAN SAYS IT'S STILL READY FOR
A PRISONER EXCHANGE WITH ISIS.
THE THREAT POSED BY CLIMATE
CHANGE, THE WORLD'S GROWING
POPULATION AND GENETICALLY
ALTERED FOODS.
THE HUGE GAP BETWEEN WHAT
SCIENTISTS AND THE PUBLIC
BELIEVE.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, A
LOTTERY YOU CAN'T POSSIBLY LOSE.
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU FIRST
HEARD ABOUT THIS WHOLE IDEA,
WHAT WAS YOUR REACTION?
>> MY REACTION WAS YES, YES,
YES, YES, YES, I WANT TO PLAY.
I WANT TO PLAY.
>> Brangham: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
HARI SREENIVASAN IS OFF.
THE GOVERNMENT OF JORDAN TODAY
RENEWED ITS OFFER TO RELEASE A
WOMAN BOMBER IT'S HELD FOR
NEARLY A DECADE, IF THE
EXTREMIST GROUP KNOWN AS ISIS
FREES A JORDANIAN PILOT IT'S
HOLDING.
JORDANIAN OFFICIALS HAVE
DEMANDED PROOF THAT THE PILOT IS
STILL ALIVE BEFORE ANY DEAL CAN
BE STRUCK.
AT A NEWS CONFERENCE TODAY, THE
PILOT'S FATHER BEGGED FOR HIS
SON'S LIFE.
ALL THIS, A DAY AFTER ISIS
BEHEADED A JAPANESE JOURNALIST
WHO WAS ALSO BEING HELD HOSTAGE.
EGYPT TODAY FREED PETER GRESTE,
AN AL JAZEERA JOURNALIST WHO HAD
BEEN IMPRISONED THERE FOR MORE
THAN A YEAR.
GRESTE AND TWO OF HIS AL JAZEERA
COLLEAGUES HAD BEEN SENTENCED TO
TERMS OF SEVEN-TO-TEN YEARS ON
CHARGES THEY SPREAD LIES TO HELP
THE RECENTLY OUTLAWED MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD.
ONE OF THE OTHER JAILED
JOURNALISTS, MOHAMED FAHMY, IS
ALSO EXPECTED TO BE RELEASED
FROM A CAIRO PRISON WITHIN DAYS,
ACCORDING TO AN EGYPTIAN
SECURITY OFFICIAL.
IN NIGERIA, THE ISLAMIC
EXTREMIST GROUP BOKO HARAM HAVE
LAUNCHED YET ANOTHER ATTACK ON
MAIDUGURI, THE LARGEST CITY IN
THE NORTHEAST OF THAT COUNTRY OF
MORE THAN 170 MILLION PEOPLE.
ACCORDING TO PRESS REPORTS,
NIGERIAN ARMY TROOPS REPELLED
THE MILITANTS AFTER THEY
ENTERED THE CITY ON ARMORED CARS
AND ON TANKS.
BOKO HARAM HOPES TO MAKE THE
CITY THE CAPITAL OF A BREAKAWAY
ISLAMIST STATE.
AND VIOLENCE CONTINUES TO
ESCALATE IN EASTERN UKRAINE,
NEAR RUSSIA, AFTER PEACE TALKS
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND
RUSSIAN-BACKED SEPARATISTS BROKE
DOWN.
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS SAY 13
UKRAINIAN SOLDIERS AND ABOUT A
DOZEN CIVILIANS WERE KILLED IN
THE LAST 24 HOURS.
MORE THAN 5,000 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
KILLED IN THE NOW NINE-MONTH
LONG CONFLICT.
IN ASIA TODAY, IN HONG KONG,
THE LARGEST PRO-DEMOCRACY
DEMONSTRATION IN SEVEN WEEKS.
THOUSANDS OF PROTESTERS STAGED A
PEACEFUL MARCH, DEMANDING FULLY
DEMOCRATIC ELECTIONS FOR THE
TERRITORY'S NEXT LEADER IN 2017.
LAST SUMMER, CHINESE LEGISLATORS
APPROVED A PLAN THAT WOULD ALLOW
BEIJING TO SCREEN THE CANDIDATES
FIRST, A MOVE WHICH PROMPTED
PRO-DEMOCRACY PROTESTS THAT SHUT
DOWN PARTS OF THE CITY FOR
ALMOST THREE MONTHS LAST YEAR.
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE JAMES
BAKER, WHO SERVED UNDER THE
FIRST PRESIDENT BUSH AND HELPED
ELECT THE SECOND, WAS CRITICAL
TODAY OF HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER'S DECISION TO INVITE
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU TO ADDRESS CONGRESS
WITHOUT CONSULTING THE WHITE
HOUSE FIRST.
>> IS THAT A SIGNIFICANT BREACH
OF PROTOCOL?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: HOW SIGNIFICANT IS
IT?
>> WELL, I DON'T, I CAN'T
REMEMBER AN INCIDENT WHERE IT'S
EVER BEEN DONE.
NOW LET ME SAY THIS, THE SPEAKER
OF THE HOUSE CAN INVITE WHOEVER
HE WANTS TO SPEAK TO THE HOUSE,
IT'S A CO-EQUAL BRANCH OF
GOVERNMENT.
BUT IT IS BEST DONE, OUR FOREIGN
POLICY IS BEST DONE, WHEN THERE
IS AT LEAST COOPERATION BETWEEN
THE LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE
BRANCHES.
>> Brangham: PRESIDENT OBAMA
WILL ASK CONGRESS TO INCREASE
CORPORATE TAXES, AND TAXES ON
THE RICH, AS PART OF THE BUDGET
HE'LL SUBMIT TO CONGRESS
TOMORROW.
A WHITE HOUSE OFFICIAL TOLD
REPORTERS THAT THE PRESIDENT
WILL ASK LAWMAKERS TO APPROVE A
ONE-TIME 14% TAX ON $2 TRILLION
WORTH OF CORPORATE PROFITS
EARNED AND HELD OVERSEAS.
THIS, TO HELP PAY FOR A SERIES
OF PROPOSED BIG PUBLIC WORKS
PROJECTS.
THE PRESIDENT ALSO WANTS TO
CLOSE WHAT HE CALLS THE "TRUST
FUND LOOPHOLE" BY REQUIRING
HIGH-EARNERS TO PAY CAPITAL
GAINS TAXES ON SOME INHERITED
ASSETS THAT HAVE APPRECIATED
OVER TIME.
PAUL RYAN, THE NEW REPUBLICAN
CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE WAYS AND
MEANS COMMITTEE, SAID TODAY HE
OPPOSES THAT IDEA.
>> SO WHAT I THINK THE PRESIDENT
IS TRYING TO DO HERE IS TO,
AGAIN, EXPLOIT ENVY ECONOMICS.
THIS TOP-DOWN REDISTRIBUTION
DOESN'T WORK.
WE'VE BEEN DOING IT FOR SIX
YEARS.
LOOK, IT MIGHT MAKE GOOD
POLITICS BUT IT DOESN'T MAKE FOR
GOOD ECONOMIC GROWTH.
>> Brangham: THERE'S BEEN
ANOTHER SHOOTING BY A VERY YOUNG
CHILD.
POLICE IN ALBUQUERQUE NEW MEXICO
SAY, WITH A SINGLE SHOT, A
THREE-YEAR-OLD BOY SHOT AND
WOUNDED BOTH OF HIS PARENTS
YESTERDAY WITH A HANDGUN HE
FOUND IN HIS MOTHER'S PURSE.
AUTHORITIES SAY THE PARENTS, WHO
ARE RECOVERING FROM THEIR
INJURIES, COULD FACE NEGLIGENCE
CHARGES.
THIS INCIDENT COMES A MONTH
AFTER A SIMILAR INCIDENT IN
IDAHO, WHERE A TWO-YEAR-OLD
REACHED INTO HIS MOTHER'S PURSE
AND DISCHARGED A HANDGUN,
KILLING HIS MOTHER.
MORE THAN 2,400 FLIGHTS
SCHEDULED FOR TODAY AND ANOTHER
1,300 SCHEDULED FOR TOMORROW
HAVE BEEN CANCELLED
AFTER A MAJOR SNOW STORM DUMPED
ABOUT A FOOT OF SNOW IN AND
AROUND CHICAGO AND OTHER PARTS
OF THE NORTHERN MIDWEST.
THE STORM IS MOVING EAST AND IS
EXPECTED TO LEAVE SIGNIFICANT
SNOWFALL THERE AS WELL.
CARL DJERASSI, A CHEMIST WHOSE
RESEARCH LED TO THE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE BIRTH CONTROL PILL, HAS
DIED.
IN 1951, HE AND TWO COLLEAGUES
GOT A PATENT ON A SYNTHESIZED
HORMONE THAT BECAME THE KEY
INGREDIENT IN THE PILL.
HE ALSO HELD A PATENT ON THE
FIRST ANTIHISTAMINE.
DJERASSI, AN AUSTRIAN JEW, FLED
EUROPE WITH HIS FAMILY AT THE
START OF WORLD WAR II.
ACCORDING TO THE NEW YORK TIMES,
THEY WERE SWINDLED OUT OF THEIR
LAST $20 BY A NEW YORK CABBIE.
BUT DJERASSI LATER WROTE FIRST
LADY ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, ASKING
FOR HELP, AND LATER WAS GIVEN A
COLLEGE SCHOLARSHIP.
DURING HIS CAREER, HE WROTE
1,200 SCIENTIFIC ARTICLES.
CARL DJERASSI DIED IN SAN
FRANCISCO FRIDAY.
HE WAS 91.
>> Brangham: A NEW STUDY
CONDUCTED BY THE PEW RESEARCH
CENTER FOUND A LARGE GAP BETWEEN
WHAT THE PUBLIC BELIEVES IS
DANGEROUS AND WHAT SCIENTISTS
BELIEVE.
FOR MORE ABOUT THIS, WE ARE
JOINED NOW FROM WASHINGTON BY
LEE RAINIE.
HE IS THE ORGANIZATION'S
DIRECTOR OF INTERNET, SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH.
YOUR SURVEY SHOWED SOME
REALLY DRAMATIC GAPS BETWEEN
WHAT THE GENERAL PUBLIC AND
SCIENTISTS BELIEVE ABOUT
THINGS LIKE CLIMATE CHANGE
AND VACCINES AND SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH.
LET'S TALK ABOUT SOME OF
THOSE GAPS.
SPECIFICALLY ABOUT THE FOOD
THAT WE EAT.
YOU POSED A STATEMENT THAT
IT'S QUOTE SAFE TO EAT
GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOODS
OR GMOs.
37% GENERAL PUBLIC SAYS IT'S
SAFE WHEREAS 88% OF
SCIENTISTS SAID IT WAS.
ON THE STATEMENT, QUOTE,
IT'S SAFE TO EAT FOODS GROWN
WITH PESTICIDES, 28% OF THE
PUBLIC AGREED THOSE FOODS
WERE SAFE WHILE 668% OF
SCIENTISTS SAID THEY WERE.
HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN THAT
SEEMING CHASM THERE?
>> ONE OF THE STRIKING
THINGS THAT HAS HAPPENED IN
OUR CULTURE IN THE PAST
COUPLE OF YEARS IS THAT FOOD
THROUGH POLITICS, FOOD
POLICY, FOOD IS JUST A PART
OF SOCIAL LIFE, HAS BEEN
MUCH MORE ELEVATED.
AND I THINK PEOPLE ARE
PERHAPS MORE TUNED IN TO
SORT OF FOOD ISSUES NOW IN A
WAY THEY WEREN'T BEFORE.
BUT IT ALSO MAKES THEM MORE
SENSITIVE ABOUT FOOD ISSUES.
SO THEY'RE SKEPTICAL ABOUT
THE SAFETY OF GENETICALLY
MODIFIED FOOD.
THEY'RE ALSO NOT SURE THAT
SCIENTISTS ARE AWARE OF ALL
THE SAFETY DANGERS THAT ARE
CONNECTED WITH IT.
ON THE PESTICIDES QUESTION,
IT WAS MUCH MORE A CASE OF
PEOPLE JUST BEING WARY OF
THINGS THAT ARE GOING INTO
THEIR BODIES AND A LITTLE
LESS SURE THAT THE FOOD WE
ARE EATING MIGHT BE AS SAFE
AS SCIENTISTS THINK IT IS.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT ONE OF
THE SURVEY QUESTIONS ABOUT
THE GROWING POPULATION OF
PEOPLE ON EARTH.
YOU POSED THE STATEMENT THAT
QUOTE THE GROWING POPULATION
WILL BE A MAJOR PROBLEM.
59% OF THE GENERAL
POPULATION FELT IT WILL BE A
PROBLEM WHILE 82% OF
SCIENTISTS SAID IT WOULD BE.
SOME OF OUR VIEWERS MIGHT
REMEMBER PAUL EHRLICH IN THE
LATE 60s, THERE WAS A
POPULATION BOMB, RAISING
CONCERNS ABOUT THE GROWING
POPULATION ON EARTH.
SINCE THAT TIME, OUR
POPULATION HAS DOUBLED AND
YET IT SEEMS THAT THE
GENERAL POPULATION DOESN'T
SEEM TO SEE THIS AS AN
ISSUE.
>> I THINK THAT PEOPLE ARE A
LITTLE LESS CONCERNED IN
PART BECAUSE THEY, SINCE THE
TIME OF EHRLICH'S BOOK, EVEN
SINCE THE TIME A COUPLE OF
CENTURIES AGO THAT THOMAS
MALFUS WAS WRITING ABOUT
THESE ISSUES, WE'VE SEEN
LARGE GROWTH IN THE
POPULATION, AND YET THE
AMOUNT OF CAT CHRISM THAT
YOU MIGHT CONNECT WITH
POPULATION GROWTH LIKE
FAMINE AND THINGS LIKE THAT,
HASN'T SEEMED TO BE ON THE
RISE.
THE OTHER THING THAT MIGHT
BE GOING ON FROM THE
SCIENTIST PERSPECTIVE HERE
IS THAT THEY ARE WORRIED
ABOUT WHAT THEY CALL WICKED
PROBLEMS.
THEY SEE ISSUES LIKE CLIMATE
CHANGE, GLOBAL WARMING.
AND THEY WORRY THAT SOME OF
THE HUMAN CONTRIBUTIONS TO
THAT IS MAKING A BIG
PROBLEM.
AND YET THE PUBLIC ISN'T
NEARLY AS CLOSE TO WHERE
SCIENTISTS ARE AND THE
SOLUTIONS TO GLOBAL WARMING.
>> YOU ASKED A QUESTION
ABOUT THE VALUE OF ANIMAL
TESTING.
AND YOU SAID DO YOU FAVOR
THE USE OF ANIMALS IN
RESEARCH.
47% OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC
FAVORED IT.
BUT 89% OF SCIENTISTS
APPROVED OF IT.
WHAT DOW MAKE OF THAT GAP?
>> I THINK THERE'S A REAL
VALUE CLASH THAT'S GOING ON
HERE.
WOMEN ARE MUCH LESS LIKELY
THAN MEN, FOR INSTANCE, TO
BELIEVE THAT ANIMALS SHOULD
BE INVOLVED IN SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH.
IN ADDITION, THE PEOPLE WHO
HAVE HIGHER EDUCATION
DEGREES, A COLLEGE DEGREE OR
GRADUATE DEGREE ARE MUCH
MORE LIKELY TO SUPPORT THE
SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY AND ITS
USE OF ANIMALS AND RESEARCH
THAN PEOPLE WITH A HIGH
SCHOOL DIPLOMA.
SO THERE ARE A VARIETY OF
FACTORS THAT TIE THE
PEOPLE'S VALUES AS WELL AS
THEIR KNOWLEDGE ABOUT WHAT
IS GOING ON.
>> LEE RAINIE, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS.
>> Brangham: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
A NEW IDEA DESIGNED TO TACKLE AN
OLD PROBLEM-- AMERICA'S
DECLINING SAVINGS RATE.
SEVERAL STATES AROUND THE
COUNTRY ARE NOW EXPERIMENTING
WITH PROGRAMS THAT HAVE WORKED
OVERSEAS-- BOOSTING PERSONAL
SAVINGS BY LINKING SAVINGS
ACCOUNTS TO LOTTERIES.
HERE'S THE HOOK-- YOU MIGHT NOT
WIN, BUT YOU CAN'T LOSE A PENNY.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
KARLA MURTHY UPDATES HER REPORT
THAT FIRST AIRED IN NOVEMBER OF
2013.
>> TONIGHT'S MEGAMILLIONS
JACKPOT IS AN ESTIMATED
ANNUITIZED $149,000,000.
>> Reporter: IT'S A MOMENT THAT
MILLIONS OF AMERICANS WAIT FOR
EACH WEEK.
>> NOW, LET'S SEE IF WE CAN MAKE
YOU A MILLIONAIRE TONIGHT.
>> Reporter: THE CHANCE TO WIN A
HUGE, LIFE-CHANGING AMOUNT OF
MONEY.
BUT NOW SOME STATES ARE
EXPERIMENTING WITH A DIFFERENT
KIND OF LOTTERY.
ONE WHERE YOU WON'T NECESSARILY
WIN, BUT YOU CAN'T LOSE.
IT'S SOMETHING CALLED A PRIZE-
LINKED SAVINGS ACCOUNT.
AND TWENTY-EIGHT YEAR OLD
CRYSTAL ROSE HUDELSON WAS
INTRIGUED BY A POSTER FOR ONE
WHEN SHE WALKED INTO HER LOCAL
CREDIT UNION IN SEATTLE IN 2013.
>> IT HAD THIS GIRL-- SHE WAS
REALLY CUTE, TOO, CUTE CLOTHES
AND CUTE HAIR, AND SHE HAD THIS
SIGN UP AND YOU JUST NEED $25.
AND I THOUGHT TO MYSELF, "WELL,
WHAT IS THIS?"
>> Reporter: IT WAS FOR A
SAVINGS PROGRAM CALLED "SAVE TO
WIN."
FOR EVERY $25 A MEMBER PUTS INTO
THEIR ACCOUNT, HE OR SHE IS
ENTERED TO WIN A SMALL MONTHLY
PRIZES OF $50, BUT ALSO THE
CHANCE TO WIN ONE OF FOUR BIGGER
PRIZES OF $5,000 EACH QUARTER.
EVEN IF YOU DON'T WIN, YOU GET
TO KEEP THE MONEY, PLUS
INTEREST.
THE PRIZE MONEY IS PUT UP BY THE
CREDIT UNIONS AND THEIR REGIONAL
ASSOCIATION AS AN INCENTIVE TO
GET MEMBERS TO SAVE.
THE IDEA IS NEW TO THE U.S., BUT
IT HAS BEEN AROUND FOR DECADES
ALL OVER THE WORLD.
AT LEAST 18 COUNTRIES HAVE
PRIZE-LINKED SAVINGS OPTIONS,
INCLUDING THE U.K.
>> THEY'D FOUND THEY'D WON FIVE
THOUSAND SMACKERS.
AND GLEEFULLY DID SHOUT, "THAT'S
MINE," "IT'S MINE," "NO MINE,"
"NO MINE."
THE MORAL: BUY PREMIUM BONDS,
WIN SOMETHING WORTH REALLY
ARGUING ABOUT.
>> Reporter: BACK IN WASHINGTON
STATE, CRYSTAL SIGNED UP FOR
SAVE TO WIN.
>> I'M NOT GOING TO LOSE
ANYTHING, SO WHY NOT?
AND I KEEP TELLING EVERYBODY
IT'S MY VERSION OF GAMBLING.
(LAUGHS)
>> Reporter: WHAT CRYSTAL FOUND
IN WASHINGTON STATE IS ALSO
OFFERED IN THREE OTHER STATES.
IN NEBRASKA, MORE THAN 1,400
SAVERS ARE COMPETING FOR $25,000
IN ANNUAL PRIZE MONEY.
IN NORTH CAROLINA, 1,900 SAVERS
ARE VYING FOR THREE GRAND PRIZES
OF $10,000.
AND IN MICHIGAN, WHERE THE
PROGRAM HAS BEEN AROUND SINCE
2009, 11,000 SAVERS ARE ENTERED
INTO A CHANCE TO WIN SIX GRAND
PRIZES OF $10,000 EACH.
STARTING THIS YEAR CREDIT UNIONS
IN CONNECTICUT AND NEW YORK WILL
ALSO BE OFFERING SAVE TO WIN AND
SEVEN OTHER STATES HAVE LAWS
THAT WOULD ALLOW PRIZE LINKED
SAVINGS PROGRAMS.
IT'S ALL MEANT TO REMEDY
AMERICA'S DISMAL SAVINGS RATE,
WHICH HAS DECLINED BY NEARLY
TWO-THIRDS OVER THE LAST FOUR
DECADES.
IN FACT TODAY, MORE THAN A
QUARTER OF ALL AMERICANS HAVE NO
SAVINGS AT ALL.
BUT DEREK KILMER HAS BEEN
WORKING TO CHANGE THAT.
>> THE PROBLEM WITH NOT SAVINGS
IS IT CAN OFTEN MEAN YOU'RE-- A
CRISIS AWAY FROM, AS WE'VE SEEN
IN SOME CASES, LIVING IN YOUR
CAR OR LOSING YOUR HOME OR--
HAVING YOUR LIGHTS SHUT OFF.
>> Reporter: AS A WASHINGTON
STATE SENATOR, KILMER SPONSORED
LEGISLATION IN 2011 TO ALLOW
CREDIT UNIONS, WHICH ARE
REGULATED BY THE STATE, TO OFFER
"SAVE TO WIN."
WHY ISN'T JUST THE REWARD OF
COMPOUNDING INTEREST ENOUGH TO
MAKE PEOPLE SAVE?
I MEAN, WHY DO YOU ACTUALLY NEED
THIS PRIZE TO GET PEOPLE TO
SAVE?
>> WHY DO PEOPLE PLAY THE
LOTTERY OR WHY DO PEOPLE GAMBLE,
PERIOD?
YOU KNOW, IT'S WITH THE HOPE OF-
- OF-- OF WINNING SOMETHING
MORE.
THERE'S A SENSE THAT THIS
ACTUALLY MAKES SAVINGS FUN.
>> Reporter: CRYSTAL ROSE
HUDELSON, WHO RECENTLY GRADUATED
FROM A PROGRAM TO BECOME AN
AIRCRAFT MECHANIC, HAD STRUGGLED
TO SAVE.
SHE PAID HER OWN WAY THROUGH
SCHOOL AND IS WORKING FULL-TIME
WHILE ALSO DOING A MECHANICAL
INTERNSHIP PROGRAM.
BUT SINCE STARTING SAVE TO WIN,
CRYSTAL IS CONVINCED THAT SHE'S
BEEN ABLE TO SAVE MORE MONEY,
ESPECIALLY AFTER SHE GOT SOME
SURPRISING NEWS A FEW MONTHS
AFTER HER FIRST DEPOSIT.
SO HAVE YOU WON ANYTHING YET?
>> YES, I WON $50.
(LAUGHS)
I WAS SO EXCITED ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: WHAT DID YOU DO
WITH THE MONEY THAT YOU WON?
>> I REINVESTED IT.
BECAUSE EVERY $25 INCREMENT YOU
GET YOUR NAME PUT BACK INTO THE
DRAWING.
AND I WOULD BE AN IDIOT IF I
DIDN'T PUT IT BACK IN TO GET MY
NAME PUT BACK IN THE DRAWING TWO
MORE TIMES.
>> Reporter: SHARON HALL IS THE
C.E.O. OF EXPRESS CREDIT UNION,
WHERE CRYSTAL IS A MEMBER.
THEY ARE ONE OF SIX CREDIT
UNIONS OFFERING "SAVE TO WIN" IN
WASHINGTON.
WHEN YOU FIRST HEARD ABOUT THIS
WHOLE IDEA, WHAT WAS YOUR
REACTION?
>> MY REACTION WAS YES, YES,
YES, YES, YES, I WANT TO PLAY.
I WANT TO PLAY.
>> Reporter: SINCE LAUNCHING IN
APRIL OF 2013, EXPRESS HAS
SIGNED UP MORE THAN 100 "SAVE TO
WIN" ACCOUNTS, WHICH ARE
STRUCTURED AS 12 MONTH
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT- OR
CDs.
HALL SAYS EVEN THOUGH THE
ACCOUNTS AREN'T PROFITABLE FOR
THE CREDIT UNION, SHE'S
ENCOURAGED BY THE RESULTS SO
FAR.
THE SAVE TO WIN ACCOUNTS AVERAGE
$358, WHICH IS MORE THAN 20%
HIGHER THAN THE AVERAGE SAVINGS
BALANCE AT THE CREDIT UNION.
DO YOU REALLY THINK THIS IS
GOING TO CHANGE BEHAVIOR OR
TEACH PEOPLE THE VALUE OF HAVING
A SAVINGS ACCOUNT?
>> I THINK IT'S FORCED BEHAVIOR
WHICH IS REALLY-- I HATE TO SAY
THAT, BUT THE REASON WHY THEY'RE
CDs IS BECAUSE YOU HAVE TO KEEP
IT IN THERE FOR 12 MONTHS.
SO IF YOU'VE LEARNED THAT YOU
CAN LIVE WITHOUT THAT $25 FOR 12
MONTHS, IT'S A BEHAVIORAL
CHANGE.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK THE
PRIZES ARE BIG ENOUGH TO DRAW
PEOPLE IN?
>> YEAH, I THINK THAT THE GRAND
PRIZE IS.
AND THE MORE FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS THAT PARTICIPATE,
THE BIGGER THE PRIZE IS.
YOU KNOW, IT'S NOT GOING TO BE A
MILLION DOLLARS, BUT YOU KNOW,
IT'S ENTICING ENOUGH TO DRAW--
NEW-- NEW PEOPLE INTO YOUR
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.
>> Reporter: MOST MEMBERS AT
EXPRESS CREDIT UNION ARE LOW
INCOME.
MELISSA KEARNEY THINKS THAT
PRIZED LINKED SAVINGS ACCOUNTS
WILL PARTICULARLY APPEAL TO LOW
INCOME AMERICANS, WHO SPEND A
DISPROPORTIONATELY HIGH SHARE OF
THEIR INCOME PLAYING LOTTERIES.
>> IT'S OFTEN THOUGHT THAT
PEOPLE ARE IRRATIONAL WHEN THEY
PLAY THE LOTTERY.
BUT I WOULD CHALLENGE THAT
ASSUMPTION.
IF YOU'RE A LOW INCOME
INDIVIDUAL, HOW ELSE CAN YOU
POTENTIALLY WIN ENOUGH MONEY TO
BUY A HOUSE, OR REALLY CHANGE
YOUR LIFE?
>> Reporter: KEARNEY IS AN
ECONOMIST AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND AND DIRECTOR OF THE
HAMILTON PROJECT AT THE
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION.
SHE'S THINKS THESE LOTTERY-BASED
ACCOUNTS HELP PEOPLE SAVE BY
LEVERAGING THEIR DESIRE TO WIN
BIG.
>> IF YOU HAVE LOW SAVINGS
DEPOSITS, WHICH MANY LOW AND
MODERATE INCOME INDIVIDUALS DO,
YOU'RE ONLY ACCUMULATING A FEW
DOLLARS EVERY MONTH, OR EVEN
EVERY YEAR.
AND IT WILL TAKE THEM TEN YEARS
TO ACCUMULATE ENOUGH INTEREST
PAYMENTS ON, LET'S SAY, A LOW
DEPOSIT CHECKING ACCOUNT, TO
MAKE ANY SORT OF DOWN PAYMENT OR
BIG PURCHASE.
AND THIS CHANGES THAT.
>> Reporter: BUT DOES PRIZE
LINKED SAVINGS ACTUALLY HELP
PEOPLE SAVE MORE MONEY?
KEARNEY HELPED DESIGN AN
EXPERIMENT TO FIND OUT.
>> THE RESULTS WERE QUITE
STRIKING.
WHAT WE'RE ABLE TO SAY AT THE
END OF THE DAY IS THAT FOR A
GIVEN AMOUNT OF INTEREST PAYMENT
A CREDIT UNION CAN ACTUALLY
ENTICE A LOT MORE DEPOSITS, AND
MORE SAVINGS, IF THEY STRUCTURE
THE INTEREST TO HAVE SOME
LOTTERY OR PRIZE LINK COMPONENT
TO IT.
THE RESULTS WERE CONSISTENT WITH
WHAT'S BEEN SEEN IN MICHIGAN,
WHERE THE AVERAGE AMOUNT SAVED
WITH "SAVE TO WIN" HAS GROWN
DRAMATICALLY SINCE BEING
LAUNCHED IN 2009.
>> Reporter: SO WHY HADN'T
PRIZED LINKED SAVINGS SWEPT
ACROSS THE US?
TURNS OUT, THE BIGGEST OBSTACLE
TO EXPANDING THESE TYPES OF
SAVINGS ACCOUNTS WAS FEDERAL
LAW.
UNLIKE STATE-REGULATED CREDIT
UNIONS, BANKS, WHICH ARE
FEDERALLY-CHARTERED
INSTITUTIONS, COULD NOT
PARTICIPATE IN LOTTERIES.
BUT THAT CHANGED LAST FALL, WHEN
A BIPARTISAN BILL, CO-SPONSORED
BY DEREK KILMER, WHO IS NOW A
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE, PASSED
CONGRESS.
THE LEGISLATION, CALLED THE
AMERICAN SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT,
WAS SIGNED BY PRESIDENT OBAMA IN
DECEMBER AND ANNOUNCED IN A
WHITE HOUSE PRESS RELEASE.
ADVOCATES ARE HOPEFUL THAT THE
PASSAGE OF THE BILL WILL LEAD TO
DRAMATICALLY MORE ACCESS TO
PRIZE-LINKED SAVINGS PROGRAMS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY AND IN TURN,
HELP BOOST SAVINGS RATES.
AT THE END OF THE DAY IS IT
REALLY TEACHING PEOPLE TO BE
BETTER SAVERS?
OR IS IT JUST TEACHING THEM TO
DO THIS JUST BECAUSE YOU MIGHT
GET A PRIZE?
>> SO, TO-- TO SOME DEGREE THIS
IS-- YOU KNOW, THIS IS INTER--
BASICALLY INTERMITTENT POSITIVE
REINFORCEMENT.
AS SOMEONE SAVES MORE MONEY,
THEY EARN MORE CHANCES AND
THAT'S POSITIVE REINFORCEMENT TO
SAVE MORE MONEY.
AND I THINK THAT'S A GOOD THING.
I MEAN, WE'VE JUST GONE THROUGH
SOME OF THE MOST DIFFICULT
FINANCIAL YEARS A NATION CAN GO
THROUGH, AND SO I THINK THERE'S
AN APPRECIATION FOR THE VALUE
OF-- OF A TOOL LIKE THIS TO-- TO
HELP PEOPLE SAVE.
>> Brangham: TODAY, OF COURSE,
IS SUPER BOWL SUNDAY.
IN THE DAYS LEADING UP TO THE
GAME, FANS DEBATED WHICH TEAM
WILL WIN, AND ECONOMISTS DEBATED
THE WISDOM OF CITIES TRYING TO
HOST THE BIG GAME.
YESTERDAY, HARI SREENIVASAN
SPOKE WITH MINA KIMES, A SENIOR
WRITER FOR ESPN, THE MAGAZINE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO EACH YEAR
WE SEE CITIES COMPETE FOR
THE SUPER BOWL AS IF IT IS
THE OLYMPICS, AS IF IT IS
GOING TO BRING TONS OF MONEY,
ENERGY AND EXCITEMENT.
IS IT WORTH HOSTING THE
SUPER BOWL?
>> WELL, SO FOR GLENDALE,
WHICH IS WHERE THIS YEAR'S
GAME IS, IT MIGHT NOT SHALL.
THE CITY HOSTED THE GAME
THERE 2008 AND I READ THAT
THEY ACTUALLY SAID OH, WE
LOST MONEY WHICH WAS
SURPRISING.
SO I CALLED THE MAYOR WHO
TOLD ME NOT ONLY DID WE LOSE
MONEY THEN, WE ARE TOTALLY
GOING TO LOSE MONEY THIS
YEAR.
WHICH IS AN ABSOLUTELY
STUNNING STATEMENT FROM A
PUBLIC OFFICIAL.
>> HOW IS IT LOSING MONEY.
>> THE GAME IS IN GLENDALE
MANY OF THE EVENTS, ARE IN
SCOTTS DALE, AND SO MANY
PEOPLE WILL COME IN, AND
LEAVE, THE CITY HAS TO SPEND
MONEY ON SECURITY.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS ALSO
HAPPENED LAST YEAR WITH THE
SUPER BOWL IN NEW YORK,
RIGHT, I SAID NEW YORK.
>> THE ACTUAL GAME WAS IN
NEW JERSEY BUT EVERYONE
REMEMBERS THAT IT WAS IN NEW
YORK SUPER BOWL.
SO AS A RESULT, NEW JERSEY
FELT KIND OF SPURNED IN A
WAY BY THE GAME.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY S SO
HOW DID THE NFL OWNERS FEEL
IN THESE TOWNS, IS THERE
TENSION BETWEEN THE MAYORS
AND OWNERS?
>> THERE DEFINITELY IS IN
ARIZONA.
THE OWNERS, THEY WANT GAME
THERE ARE HUGE BENEFITS TO
HAVE IT AT THE STADIUM, FOR
THE TEAM.
THE CARDINALS OWNER MIKE
BIDWELL HAS PUBLICLY CLASHED
WITH THE MAYOR OF GLENDALE
ABOUT HIS, WE SAY LACK OF
ENTHUSIASM OVER HOSTING THE
GAME THIS YEAR.
>> AND CITIES AND TOWNS PUT
A LOT OF MONEY INTO BUILDING
STADIUMS.
>> YES.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THAT THEY
CAN GET EVENTS LIKE THIS.
>> GLENDALE BEING A PERFECT
EXAMPLE OF WHERE THAT HAS
GONE WRONG.
THIS CITY HAS CONTRIBUTED
MONEY TO THREE MAJOR SPORTS
FACILITIES OVER THE LAST TEN
YEARS AND NOW IT'S
ABSOLUTELY MIRED IN DEBT.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE
ECONOMISTS IT THAT ARE GOING
TO SAY OR I SHOULD SAY MAYBE
EVEN THE NFL WILL SAY LOOK
AT ALL THE MONEY THAT COMES
IN WITH ALL THE TOURISTS.
DON'T THEY SPEND A COUPLE
EXTRA BUCKS HERE OR THERE,
SO YOU ARE SAYING THE MAYORS IS
SAYING IT DOESN'T MAKE UP FOR
THE COPS THEY PUT ON THE BEAT.
>> THE NFL SAYS-- ECONOMISTS
SAY THEY DON'T.
ECONOMISTS WHO ARE
INDEPENDENT, WILL COME OUT
AND SAY ACTUALLY THE
BENEFITS OF THESE GAMES AND
ESPECIALLY STADIUMS ARE
INCREDIBLY OVERBLOWN BECAUSE
A LOT OF CASES YOU ARE
DISPLACING OUR TOURISTS THAT
WOULD NORMALLY BE IN,
ESPECIALLY A WARM PLATES
LIKE PHOENIX IN THE WINTER.
AND OFTEN TIMES IT IS
INDIRECT SPENDING, PUBLICITY,
THINS YOU CAN'T REALLY PUT A
CLEAR NUMBER ON.
>> Sreenivasan: AND I WOULD
IMAGINE THAT THE NFL IS ALSO
GOING TO SAY THAT WHAT ABOUT
THE SORT OF BRAND THAT YOU
BUILD AND THE EXPOSURE
ARGUMENT, THAT YOU ARE
GETTING ALL THIS FREE AIR
TIME.
EVERYBODY IS TALKING ABOUT
THE SUPER BOWL IN YOUR TOWN.
>> AND YET YOU JUST SAID THE
SUPER BOWL IN NEW YORK, A
PERFECT EXAMPLE.
REALLY,, WHAT BRANDING, IN
AMERICA AND NEW YORK, ARE
PEOPLE GOING TO REMEMBER THE
SUPER BOWL WAS IN GLENDALE.
SOME PEOPLE WILL BUT I GUESS
THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE WILL
JUST SAY PHOENIX.
>> Sreenivasan: AND ALL THE
CELEBRITIES-- CELEBRITIES,
ITS TRAFFIC GOES TO PHOENIX,
THEY DON'T COME OUT TO
GLENDALE EXCEPT FOR THE GAME,
THERE FOR THE GAME AND THEN
THEY LEAVE.
>> MUCH LIKE NEW YORK.
I DON'T THINK MOST OF THESE
CELEBRITIES WERE STAYING IN
NEW JERSEY LAST YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: MINKA KIMES,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> Brangham: NOT A FOOTBALL FAN?
TRY A PODCAST INSTEAD.
SEE A LIST OF PODCASTS YOU COULD
LISTEN TO IN THE TIME IT TAKES
TO WATCH THE BIG GAME-- VISIT
pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Brangham: POACHERS HAVE ALL
BUT WIPED OUT THE NORTHERN WHITE
RHINO.
THERE ARE ONLY FIVE OF THEM LEFT
ON THE PLANET, AND THEY'RE ALL
TOO OLD TO BREED.
NOW, TEST TUBE FERTILITY
TREATMENTS ARE THE BREED'S LAST
HOPE.
ITN'S AFRICA CORRESPONDENT, JOHN
RAY, REPORTS FROM KENYA.
>> Reporter: SUDAN IS HIS NAME,
THE LAST MAN STANDING, TWO TONS
OF FORLORN AND FRUSTRATED
MASCULINITY.
HE CAN FIGHT THE FEMALES WITH
WHICH HE SHARES HIS TWILIGHT
YEARS, BUT NOT MUCH ELSE.
HE'S TOO OLD TO BREED.
AND THEY CAN NO LONGER BEAR
YOUNG.
SUDAN IS GUARDED DAY AND NIGHT
FROM POACHERS WHO PRIZE THE
RHINO'S HORN MORE HIGHLY THAN
THE LIVING CREATURE, BUT FOR THE
NORTHERN WHITE THAT BATTLE IS
LOST.
INSTEAD, THE MEN WHO MIGHT SAVE
THIS SPECIES COME ARMED NOT WITH
GUNS BUT WITH SCIENCE.
THE PLAN IS TO HARVEST SPERM AND
EGGS FROM THESE SURVIVORS, IN
THE HOPE THAT SOME DAY
TECHNOLOGY WILL ALLOW THEM TO
FIND A SURROGATE MOTHER.
>> WHICH WOULD COULD BE
LIKING AT THESE ANIMALS, FOR
REINTRODUCTION BACK ON TO
PLANET EARTH SEEM IN THE
FUTURE THAT IS DEFINITELY A
POSSIBILITY.
>> 20 YEARS AGO WE REPORTED
ON THE STRUGGLE
20 YEARS AGO WE REPORTED ON THE
STRUGGLE TO SAVE THE LAST WHITE
RHINOS IN THE WILD BY TAGGING
THEM WITH TRACKERS.
PART OF THAT TEAM WAS DR. PETER
MORKEL.
20 YEARS ON HE HASN'T ENTIRELY
GIVEN UP.
>> CAN THE WORLD AFFORD TO
LOSE CREATURES LIKE THIS.
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
I THINK THE WORLD WILL BE A
MUCH POORER PLACE WITHOUT
THEM.
>> FOR SUDAN
FOR THE SUDAN, IT IS A MINUTE TO
MIDNIGHT.
NO ONE CAN TURN THE CLOCK BACK.
BUT IF SCIENCE CAN PERFORM
MIRACLES, HIS KIND MIGHT JUST
MIGHT HAVE A FUTURE.
>> Brangham: SOME LATE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT:
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT IS
REPORTEDLY INVESTIGATING THE
CREDIT RATINGS FIRM MOODY'S
INVESTORS SERVICE.
THE PROBE CENTERS ON MOODY'S
DECISION TO GIVE TRIPLE-A
RATINGS ON THE RESIDENTIAL
MORTGAGE SECURITIES THAT LATER
COLLAPSED DURING THE 2008
FINANCIAL CRISIS.
THE WALL STREET JOURNAL BROKE
THE STORY.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.